
<<<PAGE 15>>>
System Reference Document 5.2.1
15
or make an attack roll as part of a spell, an attack 
has the following structure:
1:	Choose a Target. Pick a target within your attack’s range: a creature, an object, or a location.
2:	Determine Modifiers. The GM determines 
whether the target has Cover (see the next section) and whether you have Advantage or Disadvantage against the target. In addition, spells, 
special abilities, and other effects can apply penalties or bonuses to your attack roll.
3:	Resolve the Attack. Make the attack roll, as 
detailed earlier in “Playing the Game.” On a hit, 
you roll damage unless the particular attack 
has rules that specify otherwise. Some attacks 
cause special effects in addition to or instead of 
damage.
Cover
Walls, trees, creatures, and other obstacles can provide cover, making a target more difficult to harm. 
As detailed in the Cover table, there are three degrees of cover, each of which gives a different benefit to a target.
	 A target can benefit from cover only when an attack or other effect originates on the opposite side 
of the cover. If a target is behind multiple sources 
of cover, only the most protective degree of cover 
applies; the degrees aren’t added together. For example, if a target is behind a creature that gives Half 
Cover and a tree trunk that gives Three-Quarters 
Cover, the target has Three-Quarters Cover.
Cover
Degree
Benefit to Target
Offered By …
Half
+2 bonus to AC 
and Dexterity 
saving throws
Another creature or 
an object that covers at 
least half of the target
Three- 
Quarters
+5 bonus to AC 
and Dexterity 
saving throws
An object that covers at 
least three-quarters of 
the target
Total
Can’t be targeted 
directly
An object that covers 
the whole target
Ranged Attacks
When you make a ranged attack, you fire a bow, 
hurl an axe, or otherwise send projectiles to strike a 
foe at a distance. Many spells also involve making a 
ranged attack.
Range
You can make ranged attacks only against targets 
within a specified range. If a ranged attack, such as 
one made with a spell, has a single range, you can’t 
attack a target beyond this range.
	 Some ranged attacks, such as those made with a 
Longbow, have two ranges. The smaller number is 
the normal range, and the larger number is the long 
range. Your attack roll has Disadvantage when your 
target is beyond normal range, and you can’t attack 
a target beyond long range.
Ranged Attacks in Close Combat
Aiming a ranged attack is more difficult when a foe 
is next to you. When you make a ranged attack roll 
with a weapon, a spell, or some other means, you 
have Disadvantage on the roll if you are within 5 
feet of an enemy who can see you and doesn’t have 
the Incapacitated condition (see “Rules Glossary”).
Melee Attacks
A melee attack allows you to attack a target within 
your reach. A melee attack typically uses a handheld weapon or an Unarmed Strike. Many monsters 
make melee attacks with claws, teeth, or other body 
parts. A few spells also involve melee attacks.
Reach
A creature has a 5-foot reach and can thus attack 
targets within 5 feet when making a melee attack. 
Certain creatures have melee attacks with a reach 
greater than 5 feet, as noted in their descriptions.
Opportunity Attacks
Combatants watch for enemies to drop their guard. 
If you move heedlessly past your foes, you put yourself in danger by provoking an Opportunity Attack.
	 Avoiding Opportunity Attacks. You can avoid 
provoking an Opportunity Attack by taking the 
Disengage action. You also don’t provoke an Opportunity Attack when you Teleport or when you are 
moved without using your movement, action, Bonus 
Action, or Reaction. For example, you don’t provoke 
an Opportunity Attack if an explosion hurls you out 
of a foe’s reach or if you fall past an enemy.
	 Making an Opportunity Attack. You can make an 
Opportunity Attack when a creature that you can 
see leaves your reach. To make the attack, take a Reaction to make one melee attack with a weapon or 
an Unarmed Strike against that creature. The attack 
occurs right before it leaves your reach.
Mounted Combat
A willing creature that is at least one size larger 
than a rider and that has an appropriate anatomy 
can serve as a mount, using the following rules.
Mounting and Dismounting
During your move, you can mount a creature that 
is within 5 feet of you or dismount. Doing so costs 
an amount of movement equal to half your Speed 
(round down). For example, if your Speed is 30 feet, 
you spend 15 feet of movement to mount a horse.

<<<PAGE 16>>>
System Reference Document 5.2.1
16
Resting
Adventurers can’t spend every hour adventuring. 
They need rest. Any creature can take hour-long 
Short Rests in the midst of a day and an 8-hour Long 
Rest to end it. Regaining Hit Points is one of the main 
benefits of a rest. “Rules Glossary” provides the 
rules for Short and Long Rests.
Controlling a Mount
You can control a mount only if it has been trained 
to accept a rider. Domesticated horses, mules, and 
similar creatures have such training.
	 The Initiative of a controlled mount changes to 
match yours when you mount it. It moves on your 
turn as you direct it, and it has only three action options during that turn: Dash, Disengage, and Dodge. 
A controlled mount can move and act even on the 
turn that you mount it.
	 In contrast, an independent mount—one that lets 
you ride but ignores your control—retains its place 
in the Initiative order and moves and acts as it likes.
Falling Off
If an effect is about to move your mount against its 
will while you’re on it, you must succeed on a DC 10 
Dexterity saving throw or fall off, landing with the 
Prone condition (see “Rules Glossary”) in an unoccupied space within 5 feet of the mount.
	 While mounted, you must make the same save if 
you’re knocked Prone or the mount is.
Underwater Combat
A fight underwater follows these rules.
Impeded Weapons
When making a melee attack roll with a weapon 
underwater, a creature that lacks a Swim Speed has 
Disadvantage on the attack roll unless the weapon 
deals Piercing damage.
	 A ranged attack roll with a weapon underwater 
automatically misses a target beyond the weapon’s 
normal range, and the attack roll has Disadvantage 
against a target within normal range.
Fire Resistance
Anything underwater has Resistance to Fire damage (explained in “Damage and Healing”).
Damage and Healing
Injury and death are frequent threats, as detailed in 
the following rules.
Hit Points
Hit Points represent durability and the will to live. 
Creatures with more Hit Points are more difficult 
to kill. Your Hit Point maximum is the number of 
Hit Points you have when uninjured. Your current 
Hit Points can be any number from that maximum 
down to 0, which is the lowest Hit Points can go.
	 Whenever you take damage, subtract it from your 
Hit Points. Hit Point loss has no effect on your capabilities until you reach 0 Hit Points.
	 If you have half your Hit Points or fewer, you’re 
Bloodied, which has no game effect on its own but 
which might trigger other game effects.
Damage Rolls
Each weapon, spell, and damaging monster ability 
specifies the damage it deals. You roll the damage 
dice, add any modifiers, and deal the damage to 
your target. If there’s a penalty to the damage, it’s 
possible to deal 0 damage but not negative damage.
	 When attacking with a weapon, you add your ability modifier—the same modifier used for the attack 
roll—to the damage roll. A spell tells you which dice 
to roll for damage and whether to add any modifiers. Unless a rule says otherwise, you don’t add 
your ability modifier to a fixed damage amount that 
doesn’t use a roll, such as the damage of a Blowgun. 
See “Equipment” for weapons’ damage dice and 
“Spells” for spells’ damage dice.
Critical Hits
When you score a Critical Hit, you deal extra damage. Roll the attack’s damage dice twice, add them 
together, and add any relevant modifiers as normal. 
For example, if you score a Critical Hit with a Dagger, roll 2d4 for the damage rather than 1d4, and 
add your relevant ability modifier. If the attack involves other damage dice, such as from the Rogue’s 
Sneak Attack feature, you also roll those dice twice.
Saving Throws and Damage
Damage dealt via saving throws uses these rules.
Damage against Multiple Targets
When you create a damaging effect that forces two 
or more targets to make saving throws against it at 
the same time, roll the damage once for all the targets. For example, when a wizard casts Fireball, the 
spell’s damage is rolled once for all creatures caught 
in the blast.
Half Damage
Many saving throw effects deal half damage (round 
down) to a target when the target succeeds on the 
saving throw. The halved damage is equal to half 
the damage that would be dealt on a failed save.
Damage Types
Each instance of damage has a type, like Fire 
or Slashing. Damage types are listed in “Rules 
